#summary How to install SymPy

= Download =

!SymPy is packaged for the following systems, so if you use one of them, simply follow the instructions. Otherwise (or if you prefer), you can install the sources directly. All you need is Python 2.4 or newer.

= Packages =

[http://www.debian.org/ http://sympy.googlecode.com/svn/materials/web/images/debian.png] * Debian * 

!SymPy is in Debian unstable and testing. The exact !SymPy versions in Debian can be seen  here: http://packages.debian.org/python-sympy

So just add the unstable (or testing) among your sources and
{{{
apt-get install python-sympy
}}}

[http://www.ubuntu.com/ http://sympy.googlecode.com/svn/materials/web/images/ubuntu.png] * Ubuntu *

!SymPy is in Gutsy and Hardy. The exact !SymPy versions in Ubuntu can be seen here:  https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/sympy

[http://www.sagemath.org/ http://sympy.googlecode.com/svn/materials/web/images/sage.png] * SAGE *

!SymPy is in SAGE 2.7 and later. The exact version of !SymPy in SAGE can be seen here:
http://www.sagemath.org/packages/standard

[http://www.microsoft.com/ http://sympy.googlecode.com/svn/materials/web/images/windows.png] * Windows *

Download the windows installer from the frontpage and execute it. There is one known [http://code.google.com/p/sympy/issues/detail?id=188 issue] with missing MSVCR71.dll, but !SymPy works fine.


= Sources =

The only prerequisite is python 2.4 or newer. !SymPy optionally uses some other modules or packages, but they are optional. If you have problems using it on a pure Python installation, please report the problems into the Issues and we'll fix that.

* latest release *

Go to the "Downloads" tab and download the latest source archive (something like `sympy-0.4.0.tar.gz`).

On unix systems (linux, BSD, Mac OS X, cygwin, etc.): extract it with the command `"tar xzf sympy-0.4.0.tar.gz"` and follow the README located in the sympy directory.

* hg version *

To get the Mercurial repository, use:
{{{
hg clone http://hg.sympy.org/sympy/
}}}

And you can also access it on the web:

http://hg.sympy.org/sympy/

where (besides other things) you can download any revision you want as a gz, bz2 or zip file. For example, you can download the latest !SymPy snapshot here:

http://hg.sympy.org/sympy/archive/tip.tar.gz

= Installation =

Either use the usual:
{{{
python setup.py install
}}}
or just go to the unpacked directory and use it directly (without installation):
{{{
$ python
Python 2.4.4 (#2, Aug 16 2007, 02:03:40) 
[GCC 4.1.3 20070812 (prerelease) (Debian 4.1.2-15)] on linux2
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import sympy
>>> 
}}}

If it is possible for you, we suggest you use `isympy`:
{{{
$ bin/isympy 
Python 2.4.4 console for SymPy 0.5.8-hg. These commands were executed:
>>> from __future__ import division
>>> from sympy import *
>>> x, y, z = symbols('xyz')
>>> k, m, n = symbols('kmn', integer=True)
>>> f = Function("f")
>>> Basic.set_repr_level(2)     # pretty print output; Use "1" for python output
>>> pprint_try_use_unicode()    # use unicode pretty print when available


In [1]: integrate(x*sin(x), x)
Out[1]: -x*cos(x) + sin(x)

In [2]: Integral(x**2 * sin(x), x)
Out[2]: 
⌠             
⎮  2          
⎮ x *sin(x) dx
⌡             
}}}

== Test it ==

Test that !SymPy works:
{{{
>>> from sympy import Symbol, cos
>>> x=Symbol('x')
>>> e=1/cos(x)
>>> print e.series(x,10)
1 + (1/2)*x**2 + (5/24)*x**4 + (61/720)*x**6 + (277/8064)*x**8 + O(x**10)
}}}

To test the whole !SymPy package, run `./setup.py test` in the `sympy` directory. You will need `py.test` that is part of the [http://codespeak.net/py/current/doc/test.html py lib]. If you use Debian, install the `python-codespeak-lib` package. Note: you only need the standard Python 2.4 (or newer) to run all tests. If it doesn't work, please report the problem into the Issues.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 