#summary Information about the 2007 Google Summer of Code and SymPy

= Introduction =

!SymPy participated in GSoC 2007 under the umbrella of Python Software Foundation (PSF), the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) and Portland State University (PSU). Students were able to send their applications to any of those institutions and !SymPy got 11 applications in total, almost all of which were high quality. The student applications were competing with all the other at PSF, STScI and PSU. At the end, 5 best succeeded. You can find here who their mentor was, which organisation they were accepted to, their final reports and tutorials (documentation) to their projects. Besides that, they helped to fix many things all over !SymPy and just brought !SymPy where it is now.

Overall, it was a success and we will try participate in GSoC 2008 as well. It will be announced on the front page if we do (and even if we don't), so just follow the news on the front page.


= Details =

|| *student* || *svn account* || *mentor* || *mentoring organisation* || *report* || *tutorial* ||
|| Robert Schwarz || lethargo || Fabian Seoane || PSF || PolynomialsReport || PolynomialsTutorial ||
|| Mateusz Paprocki || mattpap || Ondřej Čertík || STScI || ConcreteMathReport || ConcreteMathAndTermRewriting ||
|| Brian Jorgensen || brian.jorgensen || Ondřej Čertík || PSF || PlottingReport || PlottingModule ||
|| Chris Wu || Chris.Wu || Mike Haertel || PSU || LinAlgReport || LinearAlgebraTutorial ||
|| Jason Gedge || inferno1386 || Jim Jewett || PSF || GeometryReport || GeometryModule ||

== students and mentors blogs ==

All are aggregated at: http://planet.sympy.org/

You can also find links to the individual blogs there. There are many interesting information in there about what was happening during the summer.

Besides that, the sympy's mailinglist and issues are the other two areas, where the development was taking place. See also SympyDevelopment.