#summary Information about the 2008 Google Summer of Code and SymPy

= Introduction =

!SymPy is going to participate, the same way as in 2007 (see [http://code.google.com/p/sympy/wiki/GSoC2007 GSoC2007]).

Now it's time to get involved in the project - sign up to the !SymPy mailinglist, try to fix issues, send patches, simply let us know about yourself.

You don't have to be an expert in Python or other technologies. All we require is that you work on your project as your main job over the summer. If you work hard, we'll help you with everything, e.g. to improve your Python skills and to learn how to work with Mercurial, how to send patches, etc. We also require that you blog at least once a week about what you do.

We encourage you to read the GSoC 2007 students reports (see the wiki link above) and feel free to ask them directly for their experience - either on the mailinglist, or privately.

= Ideas list =

On our public wiki: http://wiki.sympy.org/wiki/GSoC2008Ideas

= How to apply =

Technically, on March 24 Google opens applications for students as described on the official [http://code.google.com/soc/2008/faqs.html#0.1_timeline timeline], the deadline is March 31. You'll apply directly to mentorship organizations, you can apply to anyone you want, last year it was Python Software Foundation, Portland State University and the Space Telescope Science Institute that students were successful at. The applications at each organization will be judged and the best ones will be selected (according to the number of slots that Google assigns to each organization).

Informally however, it's good to get involved with the !SymPy project before, so that we can help you write a good application and select a good topic, that fits you and us.

= Links =

*Main GSoC2008 site*: http://code.google.com/soc/2008/