#labels Deprecated,GSoC
= Google Summer of Code 2009 Application =

== List of questions in the application form ==

  # Describe your organization.
  # Why is your organization applying to participate in GSoC 2009? What do you hope to gain by participating?
  # Did your organization participate in past GSoCs? If so, please summarize your involvement and the successes and challenges of your participation.
  # If your organization has not previously participated in GSoC, have you applied in the past? If so, for what year(s)?
  # What license(s) does your project use?
  # What is the URL for your ideas page?
  # What is the main development mailing list or forum for your organization?
  # What is the main IRC channel for your organization?
  # Does your organization have an application template you would like to see students use? If so, please provide it now.
  # Who will be your backup organization administrator? Please include Google Account information.
  # Who will your mentors be? Please include Google Account information.
  # What criteria did you use to select these individuals as mentors? Please be as specific as possible.
  # What is your plan for dealing with disappearing students?
  # What is your plan for dealing with disappearing mentors?
  # What steps will you take to encourage students to interact with your project's community before, during and after the program?
  # What will you do to ensure that your accepted students stick with the project after GSoC concludes?