#summary Information about the 2009 Google Summer of Code and SymPy
#labels GSoC,Deprecated

You can watch the progress during the summer at 


= Details =

|| *student* || *mentor* || *mentoring organisation* || *blog* || *report* || *proposal* ||
|| Priit Laes  || Ondřej Čertík || PSF ||  || ||  || 
|| Freddie Witherden || John Hunter  || PSF ||  || MathtexReport ||  ||
|| Aaron Meurer || Andy Terrel || PSU ||  || [ODEsModuleReport]  ||   ||
|| Fabian Pedregosa || Mateusz Paprocki || PSU ||  || AssumptionsReport ||  ||
|| Dale Peterson || Ondřej Čertík || PSU ||  || PyDyReport ||  ||

= Old info =

Older information follows:

= Introduction =


[ SymPy] is going to participate, the same way as in 2007 (see [ GSoC2007]) and 2008 (see [ GSoC2008]).

Now it's time to get involved in the project - sign up to the !SymPy mailinglist, try to fix issues, send patches, simply let us know about yourself.

You don't have to be an expert in Python or other technologies. All we require is that you work on your project as your main job over the summer. If you work hard, we'll help you with everything, e.g. to improve your Python skills and to learn how to work with git, how to send patches, etc. We also require that you blog at least once a week about what you do. 

We hope, that you will continue contributing to !SymPy even after the summer ends - this is of course not a requirement, but if we had to choose between two applicants, one delivering excellent results for 2 months and then stops, the other one also working hard during the summer (maybe not being as good as the first one), but staying with !SymPy after the summer, we prefer the latter, as this helps !SymPy more in the end -- but as said before, this is not a requirement, just our wish (see also Google's [ goals] and the Python Software Foundation's [ expectations] wiki).

We encourage you to read the GSoC 2007 and 2008 students reports (see the wiki link above) and feel free to ask them directly for their experience - either on the mailinglist, or privately.

= Ideas list =

On our public wiki: 

Feel free to discuss other ideas on our mailinglist.

= How to apply =

On March 23 Google will open applications for students as described on the official [ timeline], the deadline is April 3. If !SymPy is accepted as an organization, apply to it. Otherwise please apply directly to mentorship organizations, you can apply to anyone you want, in 2007 it was Python Software Foundation (PSF), Portland State University and the Space Telescope Science Institute that students were successful at, in 2008 it was PSF. The applications at each organization will be judged and the best ones will be selected (according to the number of slots that Google assigns to each organization).

Informally however, it's good to get involved with the !SymPy project before, so that we can help you write a good application and select a good topic, that fits you and us well (and that has a good chance of succeeding).

[ Ondřej]'s note: if you want me to proof read your appliction (recommended:), send it to me before you send it to PSF or other orgs.

= Links =

*GSoC2009 FAQ*: 

*Main GSoC2009 site*: 