#summary Some project ideas that might work for the Google's summer of code.

!SymPy is a symbolic manipulation package, written in pure Python. Its aim is to become a full featured CAS in Python, while keeping the code as simple as possible in order to be comprehensible and easily extensible. See http://code.google.com/p/sympy for more details.

== Detailed ideas ==

  * Anything in Issues

  * Reach the capabilities of Ginac
  * symbolic matrices
  * symbolic integration. 
  * implement factorisation
  * asymptotic expansion
  * equations solving
  * complex numbers in sin, cos,...
  * objects with indices (tensors) 

== Other ideas ==

Could be found here:

http://code.google.com/p/sympy/wiki/Motivation


Join the sympy mailinglist and tell us if you have any other ideas. If you choose any of the above, let us know as well, so we can ellaborate on the idea some more.

== How to apply ==

*Deadline*: March 24th, 2007

!SymPy is participating under the umbrella of Python Software Foundation (PSF). 

Go to: http://code.google.com/soc/student_step1.html

and register. Then you should be able to send your application (send it to PSF).

Main page: http://code.google.com/soc/

Main page for students: http://groups.google.com/group/google-summer-of-code-announce/web/guide-to-the-gsoc-web-app-for-student-applicants

Advice for students: http://code.google.com/p/google-summer-of-code/wiki/AdviceforStudents

PSF's page for the 2007 summer of code:
http://wiki.python.org/moin/SummerOfCode

A list of possible PSF's mentors: http://wiki.python.org/moin/SummerOfCode/Mentors

STScI's page for the 2007 summer of code:
http://www-int.stsci.edu/~aconti/GSoC.htm

Detached Solutions' page for the 2007 summer of code:
http://www.detachedsolutions.com/soc/2007/

PSU's page for the 2007 summer of code:
http://summer.cs.pdx.edu/ideas