#summary How-to on updating the mpmath install in SymPy.

*Note: this needs more detailed information*

An announcement will be sent to the sympy mailing list whenever mpmath is updated.  When this happens, the mpmath that is included with SymPy needs to be updated.  

  * You can obtain the new mpmath from http://code.google.com/p/mpmath/.  
  
  * You need to copy the new mpmath into sympy/mpmath.
  
  * Use:

{{{
python bin/adapt_paths.py > /tmp/x
patch -p0 < /tmp/x
}}}
to fix the import statements in the mpmath tests.  Remove any .orig files that {{{patch}}} creates ({{{find sympy/mpmath | grep orig}}}). Read the docstring of adapt_paths.py for more info.

  * Run {{{./bin/strip_whitespace sympy/mpmath/ --recursive}}} to fix carriage returns in the mpmath source files.  {{{./bin/test sympy/utilities/tests/test_code_quality.py}}} will verify that everything is fixed here.

  * Copy the Sphinx docs from the {{{doc/source}}} directory of mpmath to the {{{doc/src/modules/mpmath}}} directory of sympy.  Then do {{{cd doc; make html}}} and verify that the docs build correctly.  Open the built docs (in {{{_build}}} in a web browser and make sure the look correct. 

  * Run tests and see if everything works, usually then one has to fix some little bugs.  Be sure to run both regular tests and doctests, and also to test all versions of Python (2.4 -2.6 right now).  

  * If everything works, submit a patch.  When you commit, be sure to add any new untracked files in the mpmath directory ({{{git status}}} will show you all untracked files, and {{{git add}}} will add them, or if you use {{{git commit --interactive}}}, choose "add untracked", and add everything in the mpmath directory).  